**A Glossary of Steamboat Terminology**

 
* **balance rudder**—A rudder that extended both fore and aft of the rudder post. The balance rudder made steering easier and provided better response due to increased surface area of the rudder.
* **banking freight**—The act of taking off freight from a boat and placing it temporarily onshore in order to lessen the draft of the boat. Banking freight was necessary in some instances to set free a grounded boat.
* **bar**—A naturally occurring shallow area in or adjacent to the channel; composed of sand or sometimes gravel. In very low water, bars are exposed above the surface.
* **beam**—The widest cross section of a boat's hull, measured internally. The term also was used to denote the midpoint of a hull's length.
* **bell ropes**—Also known as bell cords, they were wooden-handled or brass-ringed cords strung from the ceiling of the pilothouse. The pilot used them to signal the engineer to stop, come ahead, or reverse the engine. Sidewheel boats had two sets of bell ropes—one for each engine.
* **boiler**—The enclosed iron cylinder in which water was heated to create steam. A firebox, located beneath the boiler, heated the boiler water. Hot gases from the firebox additionally were vented through flues within the boiler. A pump replaced the water as it steamed off. The water level within the boiler was critical and usually was the contributing factor in boiler explosions. The largest steamboats had as many as eight boilers.
* **boiler deck**—The second deck. The boiler deck was one deck above the boilers. The cabin and staterooms were located on the boiler deck.
* **bucket**—A wooden blade, or paddle, of a paddlewheel. On larger vessels a single bucket consisted of several heavy boards bolted together.
* **bullboat**—An elongated craft made of buffalo bull hide stretched over a framework of willow branches. Seen frequently on the Upper Missouri, especially on its western tributaries.
* **bustle stern**—A design adaptation found on many sternwheel boats equipped with balance rudders. The bustle was a bulge in the stern below the waterline that prevented driftwood from jamming the forward throw area of the rudder.
* **cabin**—An elongated, central room, running fore and aft, on the boiler deck. Also known as the main cabin, or parlor, it served as both the social hall and dining room for the cabin passengers. The cabin often featured an ornate motif and raised roof with skylights of colored glass. Doors to individual staterooms lined either side of the cabin. On larger boats, the barbershop, bar, and clerk's office were located in rooms at the forward end.
* **capstan**—A large winch, or windlass, mounted vertically on a boat's forecastle. Capstans were used for pulling in heavy lines. Early in the steamboat era they were turned by hand, but in later years most boats utilized steam-powered capstans.
* **channel**—The deepest part of the river bed. The channel is more or less continuous, but is difficult to perceive as it crosses from one side of the river to the other.
* **chute**—The non-channel watercourse around an island. Often no more than a bayou or creek, the chute delineated the "back side" of an island. Like cutoffs, chutes could be navigated in high water by upbound boats. This usually resulted in a shorter running distance compared to the channel side.
* **cordelling**—Towing a vessel upstream from the bank. The term dates to keelboat days. The cordelle was a heavy line attached to the keelboat mast and hauled forward by men or draft animals on shore.
* **cutoff**—An alteration to the water course that occurred when the river cut through the narrow neck of a horseshoe-shaped bend. Natural cutoffs took place during flood stages when saturation and erosion weakened the banks, causing them to cave in and give way to the force of the moving water. Manmade cutoffs were formed by the construction of a narrow ditch across the peninsula, leaving a temporary earthen plug at either end. When the plugs were removed, the river flowed in and widened the ditch by scouring action. Given time, the river would abandon the longer path around the bend in favor of the cutoff.
* **cylinder head**—The solid end block, or cap, of a steam piston cylinder. It was attached to the cylinder by a series of bolts and had to withstand maximum steam pressure within the cylinder without leaking or cracking.
* **deck passage**—Equivalent to steerage class on ocean steamers, deck passage entitled the traveler to occupy only the main deck during the voyage. Meals were not included, but could be purchased individually. Shelter was minimal and often consisted of nothing more than a wide shelf upon which to make one's berth.
* **displacement**—The weight of water moved aside, or displaced, by the hull of a boat. In order to remain buoyant, the weight of a boat could not exceed the weight of the displaced water.
* **doctor (engine)**—A steam operated pump. Its primary purpose was to feed water into the boiler.
* **double**—The act of making two trips past a given point, while carrying half the cargo load on each trip. This was made necessary where the current was too strong for the boat to gain headway with its full load of freight.
* **draft**—The depth of a boat's hull under the waterline. Draft was measured at the bow and stern, and could be manipulated by shifting the cargo load fore and aft.
* **forecastle**—The portion of the main deck that extended forward of the superstructure. The forecastle was the area for the anchors, capstan, spars, stage plank, and hawsers. It was common also to store freight in this area.
* **flue**—One or more pipes that extended through the length of a boiler. The flue carried hot gases from the firebox to the breeching and aided in heating the water within the boiler. The flue could become red hot when exposed by low water in the boiler. This often then led to a collapse of the flue and an explosion of the boiler.
* **guard**—That portion of the main deck that extended beyond the width of the hull. On larger boats the overhanging guards on either side increased the main deck area by several thousand square feet; this allowed a much greater cargo carrying capacity. The guards also helped deflect floating objects and fixed obstructions from the path of the side paddlewheels. It is from this function that they derived their name.
* **gunwale**—The upper edge of the sides of the hull. The main deck guards overlapped the gunwale of most steamboats. Sometimes phonetically spelled as gunnel.
* **hawser**—A heavy line, or rope. Used for mooring or towing a vessel.
* **hog chain**—A system of chains and rods meant to prevent the hull from sagging, or "hogging," under heavy loads. Hog chains extended from the forward hull, up over the hurricane deck, and back down to the stern. They could be tightened or loosened as needed by means of turnbuckles.
* **hoghead**—A wooden barrel with a liquid capacity of at least 63 gallons.
* **hurricane deck**—The uppermost deck of a steamboat. The name was derived from the ever-present breeze that made it a favorite viewing place on warm evenings. It was the location of the boat's large signal bell.
* **jackstaff**—A tall pole mounted on the bow. Though often depicted as a flagpole, the jackstaff primarily served as a vertical reference line to assist the pilot in aligning the bow with a point on shore. (See also verge.)
* **kedge**—A small anchor.
* **keel**—The main structural member of the hull, running fore and aft, upon which additional framework was formed. The keel of sailing craft projected well below the lines of the hull, but it was less prominent on river steamboats. Eventually the evolution of riverboat designs led to the elimination of the protruding keel in favor of an internal longitudinal beam known as the keelson.
* **keelboat**—A wooden freight boat built upon a keel, with a pointed bow and stern. They were propelled by means of poles, oars, or tow lines. Keelboats often exceeded sixty feet in length, with an enclosed cabin amidships.
* **ladies' cabin**—The back, or after section, of the cabin. On some boats the ladies' cabin was partitioned off from the main cabin, on others it was delineated by the presence of fine carpeting. The ladies' cabin sometimes featured a piano and colored-glass windows facing rearward. While not the exclusive domain of women, social mores of the time dictated that a gentleman would not enter the ladies' cabin unless escorted or invited in by a woman. It also served as a family room.
* **larboard**—The left side of a boat. Now called the port side.
* **lead (line)**—A weighted rope with marked increments that was used to measure the river's depth. The lead line was thrown forward from near the bow and pulled taut as the boat drew alongside. The leadsman sang out the depth in a voice loud enough to be heard in the pilothouse.
* **lighter**—A barge or old hull used to carry a portion of a steamboat's cargo. Most often a lighter was used in order to reduce the draft of the steamboat in shoal water. Usually the lighter was lashed alongside the steamboat.
* **lock and dam**—A structure that dammed the river during periods of low water to create an artificial pool upstream, combined with facilities for permitting the passage of a boat from one water level to the other.
* **Mackinaw**—A flat-bottomed, wooden-planked boat with a high, pointed bow and stern. Mackinaws followed the same design of sailing vessels found on the Great Lakes, and could reach forty feet in length. They carried a mast and sail, but on the river they more often were propelled by poles or tow lines. Used primarily for downriver transportation.
* **main deck**—The lower deck of a steamboat. Most of the main deck was open space. It included areas for boilers, fuel bins, engine room, livestock pens, and freight. (See also forecastle.)
* **minie ball**—A conical, hollow-backed bullet used in military rifles of the Civil War era. The name is derived from Claude-Étienne Minié, one of the developers of the projectile.
* **mud drum**—A cylinder-shaped sump, located beneath the boilers. The mud drum was meant to collect sediment from the boiler water.
* **packet**—A boat that carried both passengers and freight. A packet company, or packet line, consisted of mutually owned or affiliated steamboats that operated on a regular schedule.
* **pitman (red)**—Made of thick, layered wood with iron reinforcements, it was the connecting link between the piston rod and the paddlewheel crank. Use of the direct-connecting pitman rod replaced the walking beam.
* **planter**—A submerged tree trunk with one end lodged in the river bottom and the upper end poised at or near the surface.
* **prow**—The foremost, angled portion of the bow.
* **reef**—A submerged ridge. Reefs usually angled downstream from a point of land or the head of an island. Typically, they took shape as a gradual slope that rose to within a few feet of the surface, followed by a sharp drop-off.
* **samson posts**—A series of heavy poles over which the hog chains were strung. Samson posts extended vertically or diagonally upward from the hull and distributed the load of the hog chains evenly throughout the length of the hull.
* **sawyer**—A submerged tree, nearly waterlogged, but with enough buoyancy to permit the upper branches to occasionally rise above the surface. The name was derived from its up and down motion.
* **sidewheeler**—A steamer with two paddlewheels, one on either side of the boat. In all but the smallest sidewheelers, the paddlewheel was enclosed in a housing to minimize spray.
* **snag**—An object embedded in the stream that created an obstruction or hazard to navigation. The term most especially applied to trees and limbs encountered singularly or in clusters.
* **snagboat**—A shallow-draft, double-hulled steamboat designed to remove snags from the river channel. Removal usually was accomplished by pulling or lifting the snag from its location and then cutting it into small sections.
* **sounding**—The act of measuring a river's depth, usually by means of a lead-weighted rope, or pole. Depth was measured in feet up to nine feet; when deeper than nine feet it was called out at intervals of quarter-fathoms (1½ feet per quarter-fathom; 6 feet per fathom).
* **spoonbill bow**—A well-rounded prow, resembling the bowl of a spoon, that enabled a steamboat to beach itself at a shallow landing. The slow turning of the paddlewheels would hold the boat in place while loading or unloading, after which the boat could then extract itself by reversing the engines. Spoonbill bows were seen on many upper river boats beginning in the mid-1860s.
* **stage (plank)**—The walkway, or gangplank, that extended from a boat's forecastle to the shore. Most boats carried a stage on either side. Stage planks were heavy and usually required the aid of a mast and boom to place them in position.
* **starboard**—The right side of a boat. Derived from the Old English word *steorbord*, meaning "steering side."
* **staterooms**—Sleeping rooms located on either side of the cabin. Each stateroom had an inner door leading to the cabin, and a window and outer door opening up to the boiler deck balcony. Staterooms were small with nothing more in them than a bunk bed and a wash stand and chair. Some staterooms could be enlarged by removing an interior bulkhead. The term "stateroom" supposedly is derived from the habit of naming each room after a state rather than assigning a number to it.
* **sternwheeler**—A steamer with one large paddlewheel located at the stern.
* **tiller**—The pivoting control arm that connects to the rudder.
* **transom**—The abrupt, transverse closing of the stern found on sternwheelers. The transom formed a vertical wall to which the rudder posts were attached. Transoms were uncommon on sidewheelers due to the rounder closure of their sterns.
* **towboat**—A powered craft designed to push barges. Steam era towboats were sternwheelers. Outwardly they differed in appearance from packet boats by their squared prow and towing knees (i.e., forward-facing bumpers). Internally, they were more powerful and did not carry passengers. Despite their name, towboats pushed barges, either ahead or alongside.
* **verge (-staff)**—A flagpole mounted on a boat's centerline near the stern. By sighting with the jackstaff on the bow and the verge at the stern, a pilot could keep his boat aligned with points on shore.
* **walking beam**—A fulcrum-like apparatus that transferred the up-and-down movement of the piston stroke to the circular motion of the paddlewheel shaft. Also known as a working beam, it was seen only on the earliest river steamboats.
* **wharfboat**—A floating dock, usually built from the hull of a dismantled steamboat. They often were owned by packet lines or freight consignment companies. Nearly all of them featured warehouse storage space; some sported an upper deck with rooms for passengers awaiting a boat.
* **warping**—The act of pulling a boat over shoal water by means of running a hawser from the boat to a fixed object on shore. The boat was then reeled forward by wrapping the hawser around the capstan.
* **wooding**—The act of loading fuel wood onto a steamboat. Typically, wooding lasted about an hour and took place twice a day.
* **woodyards**—Independently owned refueling sites along the river. Anyone with riverside property and access to wood for fuel could operate a woodyard. The woodyard owner cut the wood and sold it by the cord (4-ft. x 4-ft. x 8-ft. sections) at whatever price the market would bear. Some woodyard entrepreneurs loaded the wood onto flatboats so that a passing steamer could take the flat in tow and unload without stopping. After the Civil War, steamboats gradually converted to coal and the once common woodyards disappeared from the rivers' shores.
* **yawl**—A rowboat that served as an auxiliary craft on nearly all steamboats.

---

